
Understand Cloud Concepts

Cloud Services Models

1. On premises
2. Infra Structure as a Services (IAAS) - mostly used for migration works, Test and development, web site hosting, storage backup and recovery
3. Platform as a Services (PAAS) - as a developement service, business intelligence, Analytics
4. Software as a Services (SAAS) - salesforce, O365

IAAS : Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is the most basic category of cloud computing services. With IaaS, you rent IT infrastructure 
servers and virtual machines (VMs), storage, networks, and operating systems from a cloud provider on a pay-as-you-go basis. 
It's an instant computing infrastructure, provisioned and managed over the internet.

IaaS characteristics
Upfront costs. IaaS has no upfront costs. Users pay only for what they consume.
User ownership. The user is responsible for the purchase, installation, configuration, and management of their own software operating systems, middleware, and applications.
Cloud provider ownership. The cloud provider is responsible for ensuring that the underlying cloud infrastructure (such as virtual machines, storage and networking) is available for the user.

PAAS : Platform as a Service (PaaS) provides an environment for building, testing, and deploying software applications. 
The goal of PaaS is to help create an application as quickly as possible without having to worry about managing the underlying infrastructure. 

PaaS characteristics
Upfront costs. There are no upfront costs, and users pay only for what they consume.
User ownership. The user is responsible for the development of their own applications. However, they are not responsible for managing the server or infrastructure. This allows the user to focus on the application or workload they want to run.
Cloud provider ownership. The cloud provider is responsible for operating system management, and network and service configuration. Cloud providers are typically responsible for everything apart from the application that a user wants to run. They provide a complete managed platform on which to run an application.

SAAS : Software as a Service (SaaS) is software that is centrally hosted and managed for the end customer. It allows users to connect 
to and use cloud-based apps over the internet. Common examples are email, calendars, and office tools such as Microsoft 365.

SaaS characteristics
Upfront costs. Users have no upfront costs; they pay a subscription, typically on a monthly or annual basis.
User ownership. Users just use the application software; they are not responsible for any maintenance or management of that software.
Cloud provider ownership. The cloud provider is responsible for the provision, management, and maintenance of the application software.

Capex vs Opex

Capital Expenditure : This is the up front spending of money on physical infrastructure, and then deducting that up front expense 
over time. The up front cost from CapEx has a value that reduces over time.

CapEx computing costs
1. Server costs
2. Storage costs
3. Network costs
4. Backup and archive costs
5. Organization continuity and disaster recovery costs
6. Datacenter infrastructure costs
7. Technical personnel


Operational Expenditure : This is spending money on services or products now and being billed for them now. You can deduct this 
expense in the same year you spend it. There is no up front cost, as you pay for a service or product as you use it.

OpEx cloud computing costs
1. Leasing software and customized features
2. Scaling charges based on usage/demand instead of fixed hardware or capacity
3. Billing at the user or organization level

Benefits of CapEx
With capital expenditures, you plan your expenses at the start of a project or budget period. Your costs are fixed, meaning you know exactly how much is being spent. This is appealing when you need to predict the expenses before a project starts due to a limited budget.

Benefits of OpEx
Demand and growth can be unpredictable and can outpace expectation, which is a challenge for the CapEx mode

Distinguish types of cloud models

There are three different cloud deployment models: Public Cloud, Private Cloud, and Hybrid Cloud.

Public Cloud : A public cloud is owned by the cloud services provider (also known as a hosting provider). It provides resources and 
services to multiple organizations and users, who connect to the cloud service via a secure network connection, typically over the internet.

Public cloud models have the following characteristics:

Ownership - Ownership refers to the resources that an organization or end user uses. Examples include storage and processing power. Resources do not belong to the organization that is utilizing them, but rather they are owned and operated by a third party, such as the cloud service provider.
Multiple end users - Public cloud modes may make their resources available to multiple organizations.
Public access - Public access allows the public to access the desired cloud services.
Availability - Public cloud is the most common cloud-type deployment model.
Connectivity - Users and organizations are typically connected to the public cloud over the internet using a web browser.
Skills - Public clouds do not require deep technical knowledge to set up and use its resources.

Private Cloud : A private cloud is owned and operated by the organization that uses the resources from that cloud. They create a cloud 
environment in their own datacenter and provide self-service access to compute resources to users within their organization. The organization remains the owner, entirely responsible for the operation of the services they provide.

Private cloud models have the following characteristics:

Ownership. The owner and user of the cloud services are the same.
Hardware. The owner is entirely responsible for the purchase, maintenance, and management of the cloud hardware.
Users. A private cloud operates only within one organization and cloud computing resources are used exclusively by a single business or organization.
Connectivity. A connection to a private cloud is typically made over a private network that is highly secure.
Public access. Does not provide access to the public.
Skills. Requires deep technical knowledge to set up, manage, and maintain.

Hybrid Cloud : A hybrid cloud combines both public and private clouds, allowing you to run your applications in the most appropriate location.

Hybrid cloud models have the following characteristics:

Resource location. Specific resources run or are used in a public cloud, and others run or are used in a private cloud.
Cost and efficiency. Hybrid cloud models allow an organization to leverage some of the benefits of cost, efficiency, and scale that are available with a public cloud model.
Control. Organizations retain management control in private clouds.
Skills. Technical skills are still required to maintain the private cloud and ensure both cloud models can operate together.

Azure Core Services 

Azure Regions

A region  is a geographical area on the planet containing at least one, but potentially multiple datacenters that are in close proximity 
and networked together with a low-latency network. Azure intelligently assigns and controls the resources within each region to ensure 
workloads are appropriately balanced.

Azure has more global regions than any other cloud provider.
Regions provide customers the flexibility and scale needed to bring applications closer to their users.
Regions preserve data residency and offer comprehensive compliance and resiliency options for customers.
For most Azure services, when you deploy a resource in Azure, you choose the region where you want your resource to be deployed.

Region Pairs
It's possible that a large enough disaster could cause an outage large enough to affect even two datacenters. That's why Azure creates 
region pairs. Each Azure region is paired with another region within the same geography (such as US, Europe, or Asia) at least 300 miles
away, which together make a region pair . The exception is Brazil South, which is paired with a region outside its geography.

Physical isolation. When possible, Azure prefers at least 300 miles of separation between datacenters in a regional pair, although this isn't practical or possible in all geographies. Physical datacenter separation reduces the likelihood of natural disasters, civil unrest, power outages, or physical network outages affecting both regions at once.
Platform-provided replication. Some services such as Geo-Redundant Storage provide automatic replication to the paired region.
Region recovery order. In the event of a broad outage, recovery of one region is prioritized out of every pair. Applications that are deployed across paired regions are guaranteed to have one of the regions recovered with priority.
Sequential updates. Planned Azure system updates are rolled out to paired regions sequentially (not at the same time) to minimize downtime, the effect of bugs, and logical failures in the rare event of a bad update.

Geographies

Azure divides the world into geographies that are defined by geopolitical boundaries or country borders. An Azure geography  is a discrete market typically containing two or more regions that preserves data residency and compliance boundaries.

Geographies are broken up into the following areas:

Americas
Europe
Asia Pacific
Middle East and Africa

Availability sets
Availability sets are a way for you to ensure your application remains online if a high-impact maintenance event is required, or if a hardware failure occurs.

Availability sets are made up of Update domains (UD) and Fault domains (FD).

Update domains. When a maintenance event occurs (such as a performance update or critical security patch applied to the host), the 
update is sequenced through update domains. Sequencing updates using update domains ensures that the entire datacenter isn't 
unavailable during platform updates and patching. Update domains are a logical section of the datacenter, and they are implemented with
software and logic.

Fault domains. Fault domains provide for the physical separation of your workload across different hardware in the datacenter. This 
includes power, cooling, and network hardware that supports the physical servers located in server racks. In the event the hardware 
that supports a server rack becomes unavailable, only that rack of servers would be affected by the outage.

Availability Zones

Availability zones  are physically separate locations within an Azure region that use availability sets to provide additional fault tolerance.

Availability Zone features
Each availability zone is an isolation boundary containing one or more datacenters equipped with independent power, cooling, and networking.
If one availability zone goes down, the other continues working.
The availability zones are typically connected to each other through very fast, private fiber-optic networks.
Availability zones allow customers to run mission-critical applications with high availability and low-latency replication.
Availability zones are offered as a service within Azure, and to ensure resiliency, there’s a minimum of three separate zones in all enabled regions.

A resource group is a unit of management for your resources in Azure. You can think of your resource group as a container that allows 
you to aggregate and manage all the resources required for your application in a single manageable unit. This allows you to manage the 
application collectively over its lifecycle, rather than manage components individually. Before any resource can be provisioned, 
you need a resource group for it to be placed in.

Azure Resource Manager
Azure Resource Manager  is a management layer in which resource groups and all the resources within it are created, configured, managed,
and deleted. It provides a consistent management layer which allows you automate the deployment and configuration of resources using 
different automation and scripting tools, such as Microsoft Azure PowerShell, Azure Command-Line Interface (Azure CLI), Azure portal, 
REST API, and client SDKs.

Azure compute
Azure compute  is an on-demand computing service for running cloud-based applications. It provides computing resources such as disks, processors, memory, networking and operating systems.

Azure virtual machines

Azure virtual machines  let you create and use virtual machines in the cloud. It provides IaaS and can be used in a variety of different 
ways. When you need total control over an operating system and environment, Azure VMs are an ideal choice. Just like a physical computer,
you're able to customize all the software running on the VM. This ability is helpful when you are running custom software or custom 
hosting configurations.

Virtual machine scale sets

Virtual machine scale sets  are an Azure compute resource that you can use to deploy and manage a set of identical VMs. With all VMs 
configured the same, virtual machine scale sets are designed to support true autoscale; no pre-provisioning of VMs is required; and as 
such makes it easier to build large-scale services targeting big compute, big data, and containerized workloads. So, as demand goes up 
more virtual machine instances can be added, and as demand goes down virtual machines instances can be removed. The process can be 
manual, automated, or a combination of both.

App Services

With App services , you can quickly build, deploy, and scale enterprise-grade web, mobile, and API apps running on any platform. 
You can meet rigorous performance, scalability, security, and compliance requirements while using a fully managed platform to perform 
infrastructure maintenance. App Services is a platform as a service (PaaS) offering.

Azure Functions

Azure Functions  are ideal when you're concerned only about the code running your service and not the underlying platform or 
infrastructure. They're commonly used when you need to perform work in response to an event (often via a REST request), timer, 
or message from another Azure service, and when that work can be completed quickly, within seconds or less.

container services

Containers are a virtualization environment.

Containers reference the operating system of the host environment that runs the container.
Unlike virtual machines you do not manage the operating system.
Containers are lightweight and are designed to be created, scaled out, and stopped dynamically.
Containers allows you to respond to changes on demand and quickly restart in case of a crash or hardware interruption.
Azure supports Docker containers.

Azure Container Instances  offers the fastest and simplest way to run a container in Azure without having to manage any virtual machines
or adopt any additional services. It is a PaaS offering that allows you to upload your containers, which it will run for you.

Containers are often used to create solutions using a microservice architecture. This architecture is where you break solutions into 
smaller, independent pieces. For example, you may split a website into a container hosting your front end, another hosting your back end,
and a third for storage. This split allows you to separate portions of your app into logical sections that can be maintained, scaled, 
or updated independently.

Kubernetes

The task of automating, managing, and interacting with a large number of containers is known as orchestration. Azure Kubernetes Service 
(AKS)  is a complete orchestration service for containers with distributed architectures and large volumes of containers. Orchestration 
is the task of automating and managing a large number of containers and how they interact.





