
Azure IDM Introduction
Welcome to the course Azure Identity Management. This course will introduce following concepts along with relevant Hands-On exercises.

Azure Active Directory (AAD)
Managing users and groups in (AAD)
Azure Active Directory connect (AAD connect)
Synchronizing an On-premise Active Directory with AAD in a hybrid scenario
Azure AD Premium features
Implementing Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
Integrating Applications with AAD

What is Azure Active Directory?

Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) is Microsoft’s Identity Management(IDM) service and multi-tenant cloud based directory.
The Azure AD provides a single sign-on (SSO) access to thousands of cloud SaaS Applications like Office365, Salesforce.com, DropBox, and Concur.
If you are a Office365, Azure or Dynamics CRM Online customer, you might not realize that you are already using Azure AD.
Every Office365, Azure and Dynamics CRM tenant is actually already an Azure AD tenant.

Azure AD includes a full suite of IDM capabilities such as,

Access & Authentication

Multi-factor authentication
Device registration
Role based access control
Management

Self-service password management
Self-service group management
Privileged account management
Monitoring & Auditing

Application usage monitoring
Rich auditing
Security monitoring and alerting
These capabilities can help secure cloud-based applications, streamline IT processes, cut costs and also help assure corporate compliance goals are pan.

Benefits of Azure AD
Single Sign-On - Quickly adopt cloud services, with an easy single-sign-on experience powered by Azure AD’s fully automated SaaS app access management and provisioning services capabilities.
Anywhere and Any Device Access - Empower employees with world-class cloud apps, service and self-service capabilities accessible from device.
Secure Management - Easily and securely manage employee and vendor access to your corporate social media accounts.
Secure Access - Improve application security with Azure AD multifactor authentication and conditional access.
Application Monitoring - Monitor usage and protect your business from advanced threats with security reporting and monitoring.
Secure mobile (remote) access to on-premises applications.
These benefits enable secure and consistent, self-service application access management, empowering business owners to move quickly while cutting IT costs and overhead.

Azure AD and Windows Server Active Directory (AD) are used for Authentication. But Azure AD differs in many aspects, such as;

It doesn't have,

Active Directory forest and Trust relations
Organizational Units
Group Policies
It uses Open AD connect, O-Auth, WS-federation and SAML protocols for Authentication and Authorization.

Azure AD Editions
Azure AD is available in free and paid editions such as,

Free
Basic
Premium 1
Premium 2
The Free edition is included with an Azure subscription, while paid editions are available through a

Microsoft Enterprise Agreement
Open Volume License Program
Cloud Solution Providers program
For Azure AD pricing and Azure AD edition comparison visit Azure AD features & Pricing

Managing Azure AD
In order to access the Application as Azure Administrator you will need User name and Password. These user credentials must be created in the Azure AD domain.

So, first let us learn,

Azure AD Domains
Managing Users and Groups
Integrating and Managing SaaS Apps
Role Based Access Control

Azure AD Domain Names
A domain name is an important part of the identifier for many directory resources such as,

User name or email address
Address for a group
App ID URI for an application.
Every domain name in Azure AD is either a basic\initial domain name, or a custom domain name.

Azure AD basic Domain is in the form of <abc>.onmicrosoft.com and is created by default when you subscribe in Azure AD. Also, it gets established when a directory is created by the admin.

Custom Domain name is a domain name that is owned and used by an organization, such as tcs.com, for uses such as hosting website.

Registering Custom Domains
For Production environments, it is required to have at least one verified custom domain such as contoso.com. And in order to achieve a verified custom domain, it is recommended to register a custom domain in Public Domain Registrar.

Why Custom Domain registration?

Organizations can own their custom domain name.
Access cloud application using a custom domain name such as app1.contoso.com.
Users can have their userid similar to on-premises ids such as user1@contoso.com .
It can be extended to leverage the SSO facility.

Adding Custom Domain is simple:

Add the custom domain name to your directory.
Add a DNS entry for the domain name at the Public domain name registrar.
Verify the custom domain name in Azure AD.

Managing Users and Groups
Managing Users includes:

Add Users
Manage User's password
Change User's work info
Assign users to roles
Manage user profile
Delete a user
Managing Groups includes:

Creating Group
Adding Users to the group
Assigning group owner
Remember, while creating a user, you are creating a Cloud Identity for that user and user account is created in the cloud, and not in the On-Premises AD.

Azure Application Gallery provides more than 2500+ applications which can be accessed by the normal AAD user.

Custom application can also be integrated with Azure AD to leverage the following benefits;

App authentication and authorization
User authentication & authorization
SSO using federation or password
User provisioning & synchronization
Role-based access control
O-Auth authorization services
Application publishing private network to the internet

Role Based Access Control(RBAC) is used to assign user \ groups \ service principles to delegate administrative tasks.

RBAC can not control application access permission it is used only for administration.

RBAC Roles can be managed by using,

Azure Portals
Azure PowerShell(PS)
Azure CLI

RBAC roles can be applied at following levels:

Subscription
Resource Groups
Resources
Permissions are inherited from parent scope

Features

Access can be granted by using built-in roles
Custom roles can be created by using Azure PS, CLI and REST API
Role assignment changes are captured in RBAC Audit logs

Quiz 01

Q)  Which services are offered in Active Directory Domain Services but not in Microsoft Azure Active Directory
A)  Group Policies

Q)  When creating a new user in Microsoft Azure, how is the initial password determined?
A)  A password is randomly generated

Q)  Which Microsoft Azure Active Directory (AD) PowerShell command must you run before you can manage a Microsoft Azure AD tenant from PowerShell?
A)  Connect-MsolService correct

Q)  Which feature is provided only with Microsoft Azure Active Directory Premium P2?
A)  Identity Protection

Q)  Your company is planning on using Windows Azure and is investigating whether a Basic subscription will suffice. Which of the features below is not available in the Basic subscription?
A)  Self Service GP Management

Q)  You need to assign a user to a role in Microsoft Azure Active Directory. Which Microsoft Azure PowerShell command should you run?
A)  add-adgroupmember

Q)  You need to implement multi-factor authentication (MFA). What is the minimum version of Microsoft Azure Active Directory (AD) that you must deploy?
A)  All the option (not free in fresco)

Q)  